mystery moons. When we look up into the
sky, we see our moon orbiting around the
Earth and very lovely it is too. But
what about other planets? Well, I always
read that um we had one that Mars had
two, Jupiter had 12, Saturn 9, Uranus 5,
and Neptune 2. And poor old little
Pluto, Mercury and Venus had none at
all. But is that the whole of the story?
Well, in
1978, the story started to change. And
that was the discovery 40 years after
Pluto itself had been found that Pluto
had a large moon called Sharon. So large
that they're really a double planet and
they orbit around each other. each keeps
the same face pointing towards its
neighbor. And then the New Horizons
program sent a mission out to Pluto and
as it approached it found two more. So
Pluto went from having one moon to
having three four objects in orbit
around each other. And as it approached
even further, in addition to Nyx and
Hydra, we found sticks and Keraros. So
there are now six or orbiting objects,
Pluto and five moons. Quite an amazing
change. Well, I'd also asked questions
about whether it was possible for small
solar system objects to have moons such
as asteroids. I wondered if they would
have enough gravity to hold on to a moon
in the face of perturbations from their
big neighbors like
Jupiter and the discovery of IDA with
its moon ductile put an answer to that
question. This is a lovely image of Ida
some slightly potato-shaped asteroid
with its little tiny moonlets ductile.
And we now know that a lot of asteroids
are
actually accompanied by smaller objects
or indeed our double asteroids such as
uh the Ditimus and Dorphus that the dart
mission went to or even the lost
asteroid Hermes turned out to be
double. So that left us with a mystery
as to why the inner planets Mercury and
Venus are on their own. Why do they not
have moons? And in 1974, the Mariner
spacecraft took a flyby of Mercury. So
the graphic of Mariner and a picture of
Mercury. And what happened was that the
UV spectrometer spotted some emissions
coming from the general direction of
Mercury. But the next day they had gone
and three days later they were back
again.
The conclusion was ah this is a moving
object and it must be quite close to
Mercury because we're pointing our
instruments at
Mercury. Mercury has a moon. This was
the dis discovery detection of the fact
that Mercury had a moon around it. And
analysis of the changing position, the
movement seemed to be about right for a
small body in orbit around this tiny
little planet close to the sun.
Well, the next day a press conference
was organized and excited stories
started to circulate in the press about
Mercury and its new moon.
But as the observations continued, the
moon just kept on going and it kept
moving away and away as the spacecraft
was approaching Mercury and Mercury was
going around the sun and eventually it
was determined to be a background star
31 Cretarus. Um, a very hot star
accounting for where all that
ultraviolet light was coming from. very
very embarrassing for those associated
with having told the press of this new
discovery. But this wasn't the first
time we'd had the discovery of a moon on
these inner planets. And I want to tell
you about Neath, the moon of Neptune.
This was first reported way back in 1672
by the astronomer Cassini. Heath had
seen an object near to Venus in the
sky. Few years later, he saw it again
and he reported that it was a quarter
the size of Venus. And crucially, it
showed the same phase. Not a star-like
point of light as the mariner mistake,
but here he was seeing something that
appeared to be planetlike, obviously
spherical, and showing phase from the
light from the sun. And having the same
phase is exactly what you would expect
because obviously if the two are close
to each other in the space then their
direction between us and the sun and
them is going to be very similar.
More reports of this detection came
through for the next 200 years
almost and it was given the name
neath. So confident were people that
they had made this
observation. Well, our textbooks don't
report Venus having a moon, let alone
one called Neath anymore, do they? And
the reason was that during that period
of time, telescopes having been invented
early in the
1600s, 70 years later, Casseni had
finally got a a fairly decentsized
telescope, and they got bigger and
bigger and bigger over the next 150 to
years, but the lens making wasn't quite
as sophisticated as it is in the most
modern instruments of today. And in
particular, there was problems with the
coating of the lenses creating uh
anti-reflective surfaces which uh help
enormously. If you don't have an
anti-reflective coating, then the light
can come into the top of
your telescope through the lens all the
way down the tube to the eyepiece at the
bottom and it can reflect off the
eyepiece lens off the surface of it.
Some of the light, some of it goes
through into your eye, but some will
travel back up the tube and out. But a
pulsion of it will also reflect a second
time off the inside of the main lens and
come back down the tube and through the
eyepiece and create a second false
image. And these double images that
these early refractors were
creating had a nasty habit of producing
a double image a quarter the size of the
main image u because of the curved
surfaces involved. And this explains
where neath had come from. The
telescopes were getting bigger and
capturing more light. And because they
were doing so, this doubly reflected but
false image was becoming visible.
Previous to that, it would have been
there, but it would have been so faint
you wouldn't have noticed. So sadly,
Nath, I'm afraid never
existed. Well, what about the Earth?
Well, we all know that we have one large
moon, but there have been speculations
at times of a second moon. In fact, in
1846 at the Tuloo Observatory, Frederick
Pettit reported the detection of a
second moon of the Earth. Now, I'm not
quite sure how he came up with this
theory or what it was he was looking at,
but so respected was the observatory
that this report was taken so seriously
a lot of people believed in it,
including Jules Vern when he wrote his
book from the Earth to the Moon. He
actually talks about the spacecraft
flying past Petit's moon on its journey.
So confident were people that it must
exist. Of course, it
doesn't. What we do have is a companion
in
space. We go around the sun on our orbit
shown in blue in the top diagram there,
taking a year to do so. And we are
accompanied by a little asteroid called
Cruithnney. And Kruithnne orbits the
sun. And it also takes exactly one year.
So it's in a resonant orbit with the
Earth and it approaches us fairly
closely and then moves a long way away.
And so if you take that first animation
and you pin the earth
stationary as along with the sun and
letne and all the stars in the
background move instead then crewne
seems to take this yellow path this
kidney bean shaped so-called horseshoe
orbit. Uh it doesn't look much like a
horseshoe in this diagram but um we'll
see why that's used as the term in a
moment.
But this is not really a moon of the
earth. But uh some people have described
it as earth's second moon.
What does happen and has happened
several times in recent years has been
that we have acquired a second temporary
moon and in 2016 asteroid HO3 was
detected coming into orbit around the
earth as a temporary
satellite and it was really another
near-earth asteroid orbiting the sun but
for a while it appeared to be circling
the Earth um and then gradually
perturbations took it away again uh onto
its orbit around the sun and this has
happened with a number of asteroids in
recent years. So we do occasionally have
two
moons. Another mystery also involving
those horseshoe orbits is Saturn's
strange double moon
Janus. Discovered in
1966, Janus behaved in a very peculiar
way and seemed to elude people for quite
a while. Its orbit seemed to be
problematic. And the reason was it
turned out to be two different moons now
called Janus and
Epimetheus. And these share an orbit
around Saturn. They're
co-orbital. If we look at a diagram of
the orbit around Saturn that they take,
they
both interact at two different points
around this orbital region. What happens
is that Janus moves around Saturn but
follows this blue
loop and Epimetheus
uh goes around this red horseshoe orbit
around Saturn. Um and they keep nei
coming into near contact with each
other. Now these gravitational
interactions at the point where
Epimetheus is just about to turn round
and so is Janus. They approach each
other. They swap some energy and
momentum and this causes the uh
effective direction of the orbit to slow
down and speed up respectively. So
they're not orbiting round Saturn in
alternating directions. I would have
hasten to point out it's just that as
Epimetheus catches up with J uh
Janus it will slow Janus down which puts
Janus into a slightly lower orbit and
then that orbits faster in a lower
orbit. So it then accelerates and pulls
away and so they swap um from high to
low orbital tracks as they keep
approaching. and uh swapping energy and
momentum which occurs in these two
points in the orbit. Very very peculiar
indeed. And the final little tale for
this concerns Mars's moons Phobos and
Deemos shown here. Now, these weren't
discovered until
1877, but the scientist Kepler had
looked at the number of known moons,
which was that Venus had none, that we
had one, that Mar
um Mars came next, and after that
Jupiter was known to him to have the
four Galilean satellites. And so it
seemed reasonable that um there was a
number between one and four, namely two.
And so he guessed that we might find
Mars had two satellites. Never
discovered during his time. But Asaf
Hall in 1877 found both Phobos and
Deemos, really quite tiny moonlets
orbiting around Mars. But there is a
real
mystery and this is that in 1726
Jonathan Swift wrote Guliviver's travels
and if you look into the book you go to
part two chapter 3 the voyage to Lauta
and in there it refers to Lauta's
astronomers having discovered two moons
of Mars. Now, maybe he was aware of
Kepler's guess, but this was 150 years
before we actually discovered the
objects
themselves. But he makes some statements
concerning them. What he says is that
the innermost moon will orbit in just 10
hours, very rapidly, and the second moon
takes 21 a half.
Well, the actual figures are 7.6 hours
and 30.3 hours. So, they're not that far
away. They're within 50% in both cases
of the right answer. So, if you're going
to take a wild guess, maybe you'd guess
two in the same way that Kepler did, but
then you'd have to guess their nature
and their orbits. And to get both of
them within 50% of the truth and in the
same sort of pattern really is quite an
achievement. So maybe Mars' moons had
been discovered earlier. Um and maybe
Swift had some inside information. Um we
just don't know. It's a real mystery. So
thanks very much for listening. I hope
you had some fun learning a few things
about some rather odd observations.